proposal: standardize error codes and messages (#17042)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2020-05-08-standardize-error-codes-and-messages.md

The second line.
```

Benefit:
- It's easy to write.
- It handles multiple lines well.
- The markdown content can be previewed on writing.

Tradeoff:
- It's hard to implement (see example below)
- It's not self-consistent (see example below)

Tradeoff Example:

```md
## Code: 8110
### Error
The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.
### Message
## Code: 8005
### Error
Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.
### Message
See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.
```

As the syntax above, the 8005 block is the message part of 8110 block, so we expect it's result is the same as this toml:

```toml
[error.8110]
error = '''The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.'''
message = '''
## Code: 8005
### Error
Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.
### Message
See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.
'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

#### Summary

> Through the above discussion, we recommend the toml version of metafile. 

Reviewer: These two lines are bold, and sure to split into two lines

# Proposal: Standardize error codes and messages

- Author(s):     Joshua
- Last updated:  May 8
- Discussion at: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1beoa5xyuToboSx6e6J02tjLLX5SWzmqvqHuAPEk-I58/edit?usp=sharing

## Abstract

> This proposal proposes to create a document to display error codes and error messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This issue proposes that TiDB components maintain standard error codes and error messages according to a consistent specification.
```

## Motivation

> When certain errors occur in the TiDB system, an error message with an error code will be thrown. 

Reviewer: ```
When certain errors occur in TiDB components, users are often unaware of the meaning of the corresponding error message, and we plan the following two initiatives to alleviate this problem
* :: Specification of error codes for TiDB components
* :: Provide a programme that allows users to quickly access information corresponding to error codes
```

Author: Cool

In many cases, users don't know what the error message is saying. So we need a manual to locate 
errors and solutions. In order to allow users to locate the cause of the error faster, we can 

> integrate the manual to the `doc` component of [TiUP](https://github.com/pingcap-incubator/tiup),

Reviewer 2: A little weird that tiup occurs here, better to add an explanation of what is tiup.

Author: I have removed tiup from this document

so that users can locate error with the command:

```bash
tiup doc desc-error <code>
```

The `code` is the error code thrown by TiDB system. Another use case is that users can search error
with some key:

```bash
tiup doc search-error <key>
```

The `key` can be any keyword from an error message.

## Proposal

### Requirement

In order to let TiUP know the the errors every component may throw, the components developers should
keep a meta file in the code repository. The meta file can be a json file, a toml file or a markdown file.

#### Meta file in JSON

The json format of meta file is like:

```json
[
    {
        "code": 8005,
        "error": "Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.",

>         "message": "See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.",

Reviewer 3: I still think we need to give a more detailed explanation here besides the troubleshooting link.

Author: Yes. But this is an example to show how to use markdown syntax in the message, the message content should be reviewed per PR

Reviewer: an explanation is always better, it s can show the best format we recommend, otherwise, guys will write a variety of patterns 🤣

Author: OK

>         "message": "See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.",

Reviewer 4: besides the error message, how about adding a `workaround` section to indicate the possible solution?

Author: We can append workaround into the message since it supports multiple paragraphs. I prefer not to add a standalone section because not every error has a workaround.

Reviewer: I think we should make the message more clear, add a `workaround` is a better chosen. And as I said, if we put all information in `message`,  guys will write a variety of patterns, user experience will not be too good

    },
    {
        "code": 8110,
        "error": "The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.",
        "message": "Set cross-join in the configuration to true.\nThe second line."
    }
]
```

Benefit:
- It's easy to write (I think every developer knows json).
- It's easy to parse (I think every programming language can handle json).
- It's easy to implement (parse json and render markdown content)

Tradeoff:
- Poor readability when multiple lines are involved.
- The markdown content can't be previewed on writing.

#### Meta file in toml

```toml
[[errors]]
code = 8005
error = '''Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.'''
message = '''See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.'''

[[errors]]
code = 8110
error = '''The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.'''
message = '''
Set cross-join in the configuration to true.
The second line.
'''
```

Benefit:
- It's easy to write.
- It handles multiple lines well.
- It's easy to implement (parse toml and render markdown content)

Tradeoff:
- The markdown content can't be previewed on writing.

> #### Meta file in markdown

Reviewer: Can we not recommend markdown?

Author: Yes, we decide to use toml.

The second line.
```

Benefit:
- It's easy to write.
- It handles multiple lines well.
- The markdown content can be previewed on writing.

Tradeoff:
- It's hard to implement (see example below)
- It's not self-consistent (see example below)

Tradeoff Example:

```md
## Code: 8110
### Error
The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.
### Message
## Code: 8005
### Error
Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.
### Message
See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.
```

As the syntax above, the 8005 block is the message part of 8110 block, so we expect it's result is the same as this toml:

```toml
[[errors]]
code = 8110
error = '''The Cartesian product operation cannot be executed.'''
message = '''
## Code: 8005
### Error
Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.
### Message
See [the Troubleshoot section](https://pingcap.com/docs/stable/faq/tidb#troubleshoot) for the cause and solution.
'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

### Principle

> In every build, the pipeline should fetch all these meta files from all repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In every build, the pipeline should fetch all these metafiles from all repositories:
```

Reviewer: How does `tiup error` correspond to error code of the specific tidb version?

Author: Of course, the error code should be adding only. This avoids conflict between versions.

```bash
mkdir -p errors

> curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb/master/errors.json -o errors/tidb.json

Reviewer 5: How about a direct parsing of https://github.com/pingcap/docs/blob/master/reference/error-codes.md? This only requires parsing one file.

Author: This file is the target file we will generate from metafiles, not the source file.

Because if we use a separated repo to record error code, every time new error code is added, the developer who introduced the error must give two PRs, one modify code, one modify doc.

This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
'''
workaround = '''Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.'''
```

Benefit:
- It's easy to write.
- It handles multiple lines well.
- It's easy to implement (parse toml and render markdown content)

Tradeoff:
- The markdown content can't be previewed on writing.

#### metafile in markdown

```md
## Code: 8005
### Error
Write Conflict, txnStartTS is stale
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check whether `tidb_disable_txn_auto_retry` is set to `on`. If so, set it to `off`; if it is already `off`, increase the value of `tidb_retry_limit` until the error no longer occurs.

## Code: 9005
### Error
Region is unavailable
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.

> 

Reviewer 6: ``` ``` ``` needed here.

Benefit:
- It's easy to write.
- It handles multiple lines well.
- The markdown content can be previewed on writing.

Tradeoff:
- It's hard to implement (see example below)
- It's not self-consistent (see example below)

Tradeoff Example:

```md
## Code: 8005
### Error
Write Conflict, txnStartTS is stale
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
## Code: 9005
### Error
Region is unavailable
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.
```

> As the syntax above, the 8005 block is the message part of 8110 block, so we expect it's result is the same as this toml:

Reviewer 6: Where is the `8110 block`?

```toml
[error.8005]
error = '''Write Conflict, txnStartTS is stale'''
message = '''Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.'''
workaround = '''
## Code: 9005
### Error
Region is unavailable
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.
'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

#### Summary

Through the above discussion, we recommend the toml version of metafile. 

> In addition, the error codes should be adding only in case of conflict between versions.

Reviewer 7: You mean `added`?

Author: I think it's `adding only` not `added only`. It means the code can be added, but can't be removed and reuse.

Reviewer 8: is it better to use `append only`?

Author: @amyangfei Yes, `append only` is better

### Principle

In every build, the pipeline should fetch all these metafiles from all repositories:

```bash
mkdir -p errors

> curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pingcap/tidb/master/errors.toml -o errors/tidb.json

Reviewer 7: Why saving file as json?

Author: typo, should be toml

'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

#### Summary

Through the above discussion, we recommend the toml version of metafile. 

In addition, the error codes should be append only in case of conflict between versions.

### The Error Definition

In the discussion above, an error has at least 4 parts:
- The error code: it's the identity of an error
- The error field: it's the error itself the user can view in TiDB system
- the message field: the description of the error, what happened and why happend?
- the workaround filed: how to workaround this error

Besides, we can append a optional tags field to it:
```toml
[error.9005]
error = ""
message = ""
workaround = ""
tags = ["tikv"]
```

The tags is used to classify errors.

#### The Error Code Range

For compatibility with MySQL protocol, the code transmitted through the mysql protocol should be number only, others can be a number with a prefix string.

The code of each components looks like:
- TiDB: [0, 9000), DB\d+
- TiKV: [9000, 9010), KV\d+
- PD: [9000, 9010), PD\d+

> - DM: DM\d+, DM-S-\d+

Reviewer: @kennytm what about br & cdc?

Reviewer: @lonng please add error code range for `mysql replication`

Reviewer 9: BR, Lightning, Dumpling, and likely DM and even Binlog, CDC depend on several shared libraries. What component prefix should we associate with these?

* Table filter / black-white list
* External storage (S3, GCS r/w)
* Split & scatter 

If these two will have their own prefix, I suggest:

* `FILTER-[0-9]{2,}` / `EXTSTR-[0-9]{4,}` / `TOOL-[0-9]{4,}` / ??? - the common components
* `BR-[0-9]{4,}` - BR 
* `CDC-[0-9]{4,}` - CDC
* `LN-[0-9]{4,}` - Lightning (and Importer)
* `DP-[0-9]{4,}` - Dumpling

Otherwise, I suggest:

* `BR-[A-Z]-[0-9]{3,}` - BR 
* `CDC-[A-Z]-[0-9]{3,}` - CDC
* `LN-[A-Z]-[0-9]{3,}` - Lightning (and Importer)
* `DP-[A-Z]-[0-9]{3,}` - Dumpling

Reviewer: I prefer the latter, let's not add too much TiDB specification to the base library of features

message = '''Transactions in TiDB encounter write conflicts.'''
workaround = '''
## Code: 9005
### Error
Region is unavailable
### Message
A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.
'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

#### Summary

Through the above discussion, we recommend the toml version of metafile. 

In addition, the error codes should be append only in case of conflict between versions.

### The Error Definition

In the discussion above, an error has at least 4 parts:
- The error code: it's the identity of an error
- The error field: it's the error itself the user can view in TiDB system
- the message field: the description of the error, what happened and why happend?
- the workaround filed: how to workaround this error

Besides, we can append a optional tags field to it:
```toml
[error.9005]
error = ""
message = ""
workaround = ""

> tags = ["tikv"]

Reviewer 9: do we need a standard of the "tag" field?

Author: The `tags` field is designed to classify errors (e.g. the level of seriousness). I think we can't classify them well before we have a list of them.
So I think the answer is yes, we need a standard, but not now. We can have it after we have a full list of the errors.

Reviewer 9: OK. Could you add this explanation into the RFC itself? Rest LGTM.

Author: done

# Proposal: Standardize error codes and messages

- Author(s):     Joshua
- Last updated:  May 8
- Discussion at: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1beoa5xyuToboSx6e6J02tjLLX5SWzmqvqHuAPEk-I58/edit?usp=sharing

## Abstract

This issue proposes that TiDB components maintain standard error codes and error messages according to a consistent specification.

## Motivation

When certain errors occur in TiDB components, users are often unaware of the meaning of the corresponding error message, and we plan the following two initiatives to alleviate this problem

- Specification of error codes for TiDB components
- Provide a program that allows users to quickly access information corresponding to error codes

## Proposal

### The Metafiles

In order to let TiUP know the the errors every component may throw, the components developers should
keep a metafile in the code repository. The metafile can be a json file, a toml file or a markdown file.

> #### metafile in JSON

Reviewer 9: can we move these rejected formats (JSON and Markdown) into the "Rationale" section? It's very distracting, people reading the RFC from top to bottom will first assume the Metafile format is JSON, and then assume all 3 format can be used, and only after reaching the "Summary" section we know that only TOML is recommended.

A certain Raft Group is not available, such as the number of replicas is not enough.
This error usually occurs when the TiKV server is busy or the TiKV node is down.
### Workaround
Check the status, monitoring data and log of the TiKV server.
'''
```

In this case, we must define the grammar and write a parser. Writing parser increase much complexity. What's worse
is that I found no grammar that fits it.

#### Summary

Through the above discussion, we recommend the toml version of metafile. 

In addition, the error codes should be adding only in case of conflict between versions.

### The Error Definition

In the discussion above, an error has at least 4 parts:
- The error code: it's the identity of an error
- The error field: it's the error itself the user can view in TiDB system
- the message field: the description of the error, what happened and why happend?
- the workaround filed: how to workaround this error

Besides, we can append a optional tags field to it:
```toml
[error.9005]
error = ""
message = ""
workaround = ""
tags = ["tikv"]
```

The tags is used to classify errors.

#### The Error Code Range

There are two options for code range:
- The code should be number only

> - The code transmitted through the mysql protocol should be number only, others can be a number with a prefix string

Reviewer 10: Which one do we recommend?

Author: This is in discussion. Till this moment, we prefer the second one.
